I'm Bill Thompson and I have two lives in this. I work as head of
Partnership Development within the BBC's archive development group where my
responsibilities are around figuring ways to get the most value out of
BBC's archive which it's collected over the last 90 years. It's infinite.
Well, not infinite, but it's a very wide variety. I'm also a technology
journalist and commentator where I appear weekly on a show on BBC One
service radio called 'Click' and write for various magazines and do other
things. My background is as a technologist, as a former [sounds like
0:00:38] recovering computer programmer, and as someone who's observed
closely what's happening within particularly the evolution of online and
the web for the past 20 to 30 years.

Okay. That's a great intro Bill. I'm sure you'll have something
interesting to say. So the first question is on technology. From the white
paper point of view we're looking to tell the commission which of the hot
or emerging technologies which should be invested in, in the near to medium
term related to big data. So, given a horizon. 2020 is coming up soon. This
is an opportunity to influence where the millions of Euros are spent
funding various research programs. There could be one particular technology
which you think is important, or there could be a set of technologies which
you think, 'Okay. These are the ones that should be looked at or require
further investment.' So, could you describe these technologies briefly and
say what's novel about them from your point of view?

The thing is I'm a bit of a big data skeptic. I've seen far too many
phenomena emerge in the computing industry and come and be inflated and
then disappear. At some point, somebody applies a nice, convenient label to
them like Fourth Generation Languages. You may remember them. Or cloud
systems. Part of the problem I have with the current approach to big data
is that I remain to be convinced that there is a fundamental issue here
that merits the degree of attention that it's receiving in terms of how we
are coping with large data volumes, what we're trying to get out of them,
and the speed with which we are acquiring data. I think there are lots of
changes going on, but taking that... Stepping back slightly and taking a
more historical perspective, there doesn't seem to be a completely new
paradigm here.

There doesn't yet seem to be to me a convincing argument that the
world has changed so much that we need a completely different approach. We
haven't crossed a threshold so much as seen the evolution development of
many different smaller components around sensor networks, around the ways
we store and move data around on very high speed networks, and around some
of the models for data processing. But, as I say, I remain more skeptical
than most people about the computing science fundamentals that underpin
this. If you look at the companies who are doing the work in this area --
the Oracles, the IBMs and people like that -- they're just continuing down
a path they've been carrying on for 30, 40 years with database systems.

Okay. There are two points that come up in what you said, Bill. One
is; don't spend the money at all rather than which area we should spend the
money on. So you may want to comment on, do you think it's worth
investment? To be more specific is there any subset, any particular subarea
of what's labelled big data where you think or do you think there's too
much money being spent there at the moment? The other is in my interviews,
I've heard from several people that what they see is happening is they see
a collection of technologies which have each had some incremental
improvement. This collection of technologies when they come together,
provides something that seems to be very new.

For example, the ability to now do information extraction at web
scale which relies on information extraction technologies improving but
also other frameworks coming into play that are easy to use such as Hadoop.
So there are two comments there. One is, is there anything we should
invest? Or should we tell the commission 'stop funding this area'? And then
secondly, is there anything in this incremental improvements of collections
of technologies now producing something which is somehow different?

To answer your first question, there are issues being raised and
there are fundamental technologies being developed here which will merit
from investment in the way that the EU has invested in early stage
technology for many years, more or less successfully, but certainly has
done it. I don't think the argument I'm making is that we don't need to
spend some money here to ensure that things develop in a way which supports
the broader aspirations of the European community. And I mean those both
social and economic if you like. Simply because, as you've said, there are
improvements in certain key technologies around the ways we store and
process these data. Around the things that we can extract from it around
the ways in which we can deploy the core technologies.

So, there are improvements that could be made and ways that it could
be made better. If you look at database systems for example, we can see how
current models start to strain with the data volumes that are available to
us and how some of the big scientific research projects, and what's
happened at CERN with the LHC is a good example, have had to look very
carefully at the ways in which they manage those data stores. So, there are
real technical issues, but I think there are constellation of technical
issues. Each one merits some attention because solving them can lead to
economic gains. It can lead to new markets. It can lead to different ways
to think about solving some of the social problems that face us.

My skepticism is more about pulling everything together under the
phrase 'big data'. That's partly because, as I said, I don't think the
phase change has happened. I don't think that there is a disjunction
between the way we used to do things and the way we do things now which is
great enough for us to think, 'Well. It's a whole new world and everything
is different.' I think everything is mostly the same and it's part of a
continuum of the increased access to digital tools and technology, to the
ways in which we are basing decision making in sciences, in social science,
in politics, in our education, in our everyday life, in all sorts of areas
around the things we are told by the databases and the databased systems
that surround us.

So, the increased reliance of the wider society and wider economy on
digital tools and technology creates an issue. The decision to label that
one particular set of approaches -- the big data approach -- I fear will be
more confusing than enlightening and in particular will be used to smuggle
in another collection of technocratic approaches to problem solving that
will not benefit us. So, what I'm interested in is how we look at the
technical issues that face us and the spaces for investment with things
like very high speed networks, compact data stores, data analysis in
particular, and how we develop software that can deal with those volumes of
data and come up with analyses that we can respect and value and make
decisions on the basis of, in an open and transparent way. Without creating
yet another big massive black box of technology that the populace as a
whole are just expected to accept as there and believe.

So, what I really want to do is to unpack the big data model to say,
'Okay. What are the actual areas there?' And you've done this in your
thinking within the big project. I think the analysis that you have of the
different techniques is very, very useful because it allows us to talk
about some of the technical issues, some of the data storage issues, some
of the societal issues, and to try to tease them out. I think that's the
best approach to take. And allowing it all to be encapsulated as big data
creates the danger that we will lose a sense of the granularity of what's
going on. Lose a sense of how those components fit together.

And for me the issues that come from, for example, having a sensor
rich environment. The fact that, for example, one of the issues that
particularly concerns me, millions of us, tens of millions in Europe, are
carrying around smartphones that are essentially sophisticated data-logging
devices that give us access to the internet and allow us occasionally to
make phone calls. And that much of this data is being stored by the phone
companies and by the organisations who sit behind those phones and is
fairly easily accessible to the authorities, should give us pause.

We have instrumented our environment by carrying around devices like
this one and we're not thinking about the implications. The big data
thinking that is currently going on is largely about how we improve the
quality of data capture, how we improve the quality of the storage and
analysis of that data, how we improve the ability to make inferences from
it, and far too little about what this means for the wider society. So,
right back to the start of your question, yes, it's worth spending money on
it, but I think we should be spending money on the individual bits of it
and be quite skeptical about that bigger picture model. And within that
skepticism start, at this stage, asking those very important societal
questions about what will happen when all of these things are fixed.

Okay. That was very interesting. Of course, there's the point that
you know as well as me or even better that one's ability to attract large
amounts of funding from the EU and from national governments tends to
depend on having a nice label. And so you have a chicken and egg with that.
That you create a label in order to attract the funding so that you can do
something interesting, rather than the other way around sometimes. But
that's somehow life.

I had two follow-up questions. One is you talked about the
technological side and the social side. So imagining that we have this pot
of money that's about to be allocated for what's labelled as big data and
you want to give a message to the EU about how they might divvy up this pot
of money. If we talk about specific technologies, would there be specific
areas -- you may have mentioned them already such as high speed networks --
that you would say, 'Okay. Look. These are a couple of particular specific
areas where you should put the money'? Then maybe other areas you may want
to say, 'These are some areas which you really shouldn't spend the money
on.' Sorry, a third follow-up is you mentioned the social sciences. Do you
think there should be a specific allocation of funds? I guess you do in the
social area, but maybe you want to say a little bit more about how those
funds should be spent. So, we're talking about the funding here. So,
specific technologies which you think, 'Okay. Let's spend the money here.'
Specific technologies where you should say, 'Well, let's not spend the
money here.' And then the social side. So, the areas or elements of the
social side where you think, 'Okay, let's start funding these.' And I guess
maybe from what you were saying that this social funding would be coupled
with the technology funding, so it might not be a separate theme but the
two might go together. So, I hope that was clear Bill.

It was. I suppose the analogy I would use before I get into the
details is, Europe's approach to data protection. The fact is that for 20
years now, the European approach to data protection and the limits that are
placed on how technologies can be deployed has been quite distinctive and
contrast completely with the US approach. And they are only just really now
started to realise there might be benefits to the European approach. So,
what happened there was the ability to develop a framework for regulation,
in this case, before the technologies emerged. And that's always a good
idea because if you can have your regulatory framework in place, while the
technology is developing, if you can anticipate where things are going to
go and have the rules in place to ensure that the impact is therefore
either tempered if it's some incredibly disruptive technology. Or something
which is not so disruptive to the things in society that you value. Then it
becomes much easier trying to retrofit those rules and regulations as we
discover again and again, is incredible difficult. Putting increasing
regulation in the states in a world where Facebook is there and Mark
Zuckerberg and colleagues are spending millions of dollars lobbying in
Washington is going to be as difficult as getting gun regulation. I would
say when it comes to big data, I don't expect my solitary voice crying in
the wilderness saying, 'This is just a bit of marketing hype that's been
pulled over a set of disparate technologies in order to allow people to get
funding for them from public and private services' is going to have any
impact.

So, let's accept that the model there is going to continue. Given
that, we should be asking ourselves now, where does it end? In 2020. In
2025 when we have a very sensor rich environment. When we believe we've
solved the problems of capturing the data, not losing it as it's
transferred over networks into a massive parallel data stores that are
fully cross-linked and cross-referenced. Where we can both extract
knowledge and derive inferences from that data in a reasonably reliable or
certainly within a publicly stated margins of error. Where we can do all
that. Where, for example, we have enough big data for driverless cars to
happen. Where there was enough traffic sensor data and reliable systems in
cars for us to have taken drivers out of cars. What sort of regulatory
environment would we want those systems to be deployed in and can we start
the move towards that regulatory environment now so the laws are in place
when the technology arrives? So, that I think would be a really important
research project.

It's to combine futurism with planning the legal framework and the
societal framework in a way that's not done very often and can offer very
good outcomes. So, that's the sort of thing that I'm thinking about. When
it comes to specific technologies, for me, I think that enough money is
going to be spent elsewhere solving a lot of the technical issues because
there is so much money to be made out of it.

The fact is that Google, Facebook, and Amazon, those companies, and
Microsoft indeed, are investing vast amounts of money in solving these
problems because they see significant commercial advantage. What they won't
be investing vast amounts of money in are basically, solutions for the
poor. It's like big pharma will spend a lot of money on drugs for heart
disease and not very much on drugs for malaria because they don't make
enough money out of keeping poor people alive. Well, it may well be that
there are gaps within the technology frameworks that are evolving already
that are specifically relevant to the non-commercial use of these systems
where there is no obvious advertising. Where there is no obvious
sharecropping of contributed value by the users. That would be an
appropriate area for public investment.

Now, I'm not speaking for the BBC in any sense here. I'm not the BBCs
big data person or I'm not a BBC policy person, but the BBC has a mandate
to offer the things it makes and the things it delivers to everyone in the
UK or the licence fee payers as they're called on a free, fair, and equal
basis. It has a... [break in audio]

The rules in the BBC, meaning that we don't do advertising and also
we have to take very good care of the personal data that is entrusted to
us. In a world of television broadcasting, the BBC knew very little about
its viewers because you had radio waves going out from central towers being
picked up by dumb televisions and displayed in peoples' living rooms and
nobody knew who was watching what. In a world of iPlayer and video-on-
demand services, in theory, the BBC could know a great deal about everyone
who watches every programme. And the BBC chooses not to record and exploit
that data is a really interesting question. Because there's public value in
there but there's potentially also invasions of privacy. And the BBC, as a
corporation, will always err on the side of respecting its viewers. We are
mandated to do that. Other organisations will not do that in the same way.
So, the solutions that are going to come out of the massive project within
these large corporations to manage user data are not necessarily those that
are going to be useful or valuable to public service broadcasters as they
move into this sphere. They're not necessarily going to be useful or
valuable to local governments, or elected officials, or individuals at
home.

So, I think there is real work to be done there to either fill those
gaps or provide support for the commercial companies to help them fill the
gaps in collaboration and partnership to ensure that the technologies that
end up being deployed are capable of being deployed in the public interest.
We've seen again and again with the developments of technology where that
is not the case. I think the evolution of Microsoft Office and its
deployment in schools and colleges is a good example of how a system, a
toolset built entirely to make profit for one company, and designed to
serve the interests of industry was shoehorned into education. To the
detriment of hundreds of millions of students who came out of school having
been put off information technology, never having learned really anything
about the computer they were using equipped with a skill set that only
fitted them to go into organisations that had bought into the de facto
monopoly that Microsoft established. We don't want that to be the case with
the collection of technologies that together constitute the big data
environment. I think that would be an important part of it.

 There's also -- this is my broken record -- the fact that unless
individuals understand how these systems work and how they are created and
what opportunities they offer and what threats they oppose, and how they
are being deployed, then we will have a society which is not in control of
its own destiny. So, as well as the social side of understanding the
implications and the regulation, there's also an urgent need for education.
As part of the broader attempt to teach people about the implications of
going online, and use of the internet, and the deployment of information in
communications technologies in their lives. To appreciate how big data
systems work, how they're constructed, what they can be used for, what they
can't be used for, and to enable people to make assessment of the
reliability and effectiveness of those systems, for me, becomes deeply,
deeply important. If these tools are going to be deployed into a wider
society, it needs to be a society that is prepared for them. And I spoke in
terms of the regulation environment that governs their use and the broader
understanding of what they are and what their disruptive impact could be.

Well, thanks for that Bill. There are a couple of things you said
there which resonate with other interviewees that I've had. I think there
are two which come out. One is the EU versus the US. So, I was speaking to
Andras Torry [sounds like 00:24:14], the founder of Semanta, and he was
saying that the US has a lead in the big data area which it will maintain
because of the difference between the US and the EU privacy laws. There is
an inherent tension between open data and privacy. The one can't really
fully resolve, so you have to choose whether you want one or the other. So,
I guess he was advocating a US model and the EU privacy law somehow holding
us back. This was also mentioned by Richard Benjamins who's a vice-
president at Telefonica. He was complaining that he wishes that he could do
the things with his mobile data that IT companies can do with their data.
So, he would like to push the EU to allow companies like Telefonica to do
more with their mobile data. So for example, they want to sell mobile data
to allow retail companies to plan where there shops are. So, that's one
issue which is this. There's a tradeoff between privacy and openness and he
difference between the US and the EU. Let me ask you that first and then I
can go over to my second point in a moment.

I think the tension is not between open data and privacy because open
data doesn't imply personal data and in fact the core of open data
principles is that privacy is respected. So, I think we need to not put
those two in opposition because they are not in opposition. I think it's
dangerous thinking to say that they are. The Open Data Institute, the Open
Knowledge Foundation are doing incredibly good and important work in
navigating that distinction. So, there's a difference between the sense
that personal data belongs to the organisation that collects it and the
sense that it remains somehow belongs to the person who contributes it.
Organisations in the UK and Europe like My Data and My Desk with their
personal data stores that are currently being used, deployed by the
Department of Work and Pensions are trying to construct services based
around respect for individual and the data about them, that is as flexible
as it can be to make it available for analysis. So if Telefonica wanted to
use mobile data, to be anonymised I presume, to advise shops. Why don't
they go to all of their customers and say, 'Would you be willing for your
mobile data to be anonymised and used for this service and we will take
five percent off your phone bill every month as a result?' Problem solved.

Companies tend to just not to want to have to go through the trouble
of getting consent because they don't actually value the personal data of
their customers. So, I'm not prone to be sympathetic towards those
arguments. And I'm not prone really to be sympathetic towards the argument
that Europe's respect for individuals and their personal privacy is somehow
a massive inhibitor to technology growth. I think there were so many other
reasons why the US is more advanced in this sector. There could be a
[inaudible 0:28:09] and have things to do with for example investors, and
banking, and entrepreneurship and all of those things. That to blame the
fact that we have a regulatory system which stops companies from
arbitrarily my personal data for their profit, is I think pushing it
slightly. So, I don't think there is an essential issue here, or rather I
think the difference between the US and Europe is much deeper and that this
is a bit of a smokescreen put up by companies who just like not to have to
bother to properly respect or care for the personal data with which they
have been entrusted. That's my main view on that.

Okay. So, my second point was on, I guess, there were two points you
made. One was that the EU can fill in the gaps of addressing the needs of
EU citizens which we imagine will not be addressed by the large companies
in the area and also relate to the fact that education is important
otherwise we'll end up with the equivalent of Microsoft Office in schools
which I won't say any more on. So this, I think, relates to two interviews
I did. One was with somebody Uzman Hack [SP] who was at Cosm which was
formerly Pachube. And he said he thought it was important that communities
engaged and one way to do this was communities should be involved in
acquiring big data. So he talked about examples where citizens were
collecting radiation data after the Fukushima disaster and also collecting
air quality data in the states.

So citizens should be educated but they should be involved in the
process from the very beginning and then they can engage in debate at a
meaningful level which Alon Halevy from Google who's one of the people
working on Google Fusion Tables which allows any citizen to have their data
stored by Google. This public data was being used to good effect by data
journalists. So, there you had the public collecting data which can be used
by journalists to write interesting stories. I'd like you to comment on
this. There's a need for education. There's a need for the EU to fund the
areas where big data might be. Do you think that this community engagement
is part of that? So is really the EU's funding areas to get the EU citizens
to be involved with big data at all levels.

I mean I would actually go beyond the EU. I think it's the EU's
responsibility to make sure big data serves everyone in the world and not
from the point of view of a very technocratic US IT community that is
increasingly outside any effective regulation. I think there is a
responsibility here that as these significant technologies are deployed to
make sure, again, as with drugs, to make sure that fundamental research
goes into areas that are not sexy, interesting, or attractive to large
companies that are primarily concerned with shareholder value. This is what
public funding should be doing. Not about replicating or replacing the
things that will be funded anyway, but about providing a regulatory
environment within which they are deployed to try to shape their
development and where necessary to correct not market failure but
imaginative failure.

The value, for example, of say widely deployed sensor networks in sub-
Saharan Africa could be enormous. We could be in a position to predict
drought. We could be in a position to stop famines. We could do all of this
but if the tools that we have to do those things were designed on the West
Coast of the United States in order to allow affluent North Americans to
manage the watering of their gardens, for example, then they're not going
to work properly for those purposes. So, I think it is much bigger than
just saying we need to protect the EU interest. We need to protect the
interests of the wider world. Education is part of that because unless you
know to ask these questions, you will accept the solutions that emerge and
you won't know how  to participate in that debate. So, it really does
matter.

Having citizen participation therefore becomes important in two ways.
The first, and I think I would agree with was Uzman was saying. The first
is just that it's a good thing. That millions of people on the ground or
even thousands of people on the ground can collect valuable data and it can
be processed and used in useful, important ways. The second, of course, is
that participation is a way to understanding. We can look at the success of
citizen science projects like Galaxy Zoo for example or SETI at home or
protein folding to see that if you give individuals the opportunity to
actually do real science with the technology that's available to them, they
will take those opportunities, and may in the process understand a bit more
about how data is collected, how it's processed, and about the scientific
process. So it is with big data as well.

If we give people the opportunity to choose and participate in a very
open and transparent way, then they will have much bigger insight into the
way those same technologies are used to deliver adverts or used to
influence their lives in other ways. It becomes a positively self-
reinforcing cycle. The more you ask people to engage with these sorts of
projects, the more you make them aware of the ways in which the data can be
used for good, the more aware they will be of other ways in which it could
be used and be in a position to make some choices about it. And the choice
may be to say, 'Well, it's fine. I'm perfectly happy for my data to be used
in these ways. Perfectly happy for all of this to happen because we see the
broader benefits.' That would be a choice based around understanding rather
than obfuscation.

Okay. I have just two more questions for the interview, Bill. The
first one is related to impact. So, let's take a positive view and say all
your wishes come true. So, the EU begins to fund the areas which will
support the, let's say, the citizens that may be neglected by big
companies. What do you think the impact of this would be and you can talk
about impact in any sense that you like including technical, societal,
economic, policy, or business? So, a world in which the citizens are truly
engaged and educated around big data.

So, an easy one then. Well, it's the technocratic dream, isn't it?
That you have active and engaged citizens who are in control of the
technologies that shape their lives are making sensible, well-informed
policy decisions that create a business and regulatory environment within
which the market can flourish because it is appropriately regulated to
serve both stakeholder interests and the public interest. So, yeah, the big
picture is, 'Hey. Heaven.' The reality of course will be messier.

I think the real impact would be if we think about the ecosystem
model. Instead of having a few top predators that are profoundly commercial
entities or governments serviced by those commercial entities and trying to
control their behavior using regulations that are largely ineffective
because the impetus to make more use of the data to make profit, to speed
things up, or just to keep things running, would be so great that any
attempt to regulate in the public interest would just crumble away, we have
a more balanced system where we have a much more diverse ecosystem of big
data users and applications that become self-balancing to some extent.
Where there are alternatives. Where there is significantly more openness
about how data is being collected, stored, processed, analysed, deployed,
and used and what the implications of that are. So, that you've got a more
balanced system. It's not that everything is perfect. It never is. It's
more that we avoid some of the excesses either way of either limiting the
deployment of these incredibly valuable technologies in ways that become
socially damaging or technically damaging. Or allowing this sort of free
for all that means that our privacy is completely diminished or vanished
and that there is no way off the grid.

So, I see the impact as being on all these levels. My view is that
that would actually improve the quality of the technology. Rather than
having this sort of the relatively closed worlds of a small number of
massive organisations that largely determine the development and deployment
of big data tools and services and everyone else having to fit in with the
world they've created, we have a much more diverse market. We actually have
a more creative environment within which innovation can flourish. Within
which small companies have a reasonable chance of growing to the size where
they could replace some of the large players. We avoid the monopoly
situation that has happened so many times in the past in the world of IT
and could well happen again in this particular area. So, I see it as being
something that will have a positive market impact as well as a positive
societal impact.

Okay. Thanks for that very positive view, Bill. The last question is
really a meta-level question. I'm interviewing a series of people. You're
about number 14 or 15 at the moment. And at the end I ask each individual
to either let me know straight away or to drop me a mail later on if they
want to about who else they think I should be talking to in terms of
individuals or organisations, or if there are any online resources that we
should have a look at as we write our white paper.

I'll drop you an email. Two obvious people to talk to if they're not
already on your list are Dave Birch from Consult Hyperion who does a lot
about electronic cash and financial markets where big data matters quite a
lot. And he's very good on identity issues. And Katherine Corrick, who's
currently working at the Open Data Institute. Her background is in advising
organisations on their online strategies and she's quite an astute observer
of the tech scene. She might be good as well. I'll send you both their
details.

Okay. Thank you for that Bill. So that's the end of the interview.
Thank you very much for giving up your valuable time to us. So, I'll clean
this up, send it to my colleagues in the big data, and it will go up on our
blog and I'll let you know when it is. I'll also see you next week in
Dublin at the EDF event. So, thank you once again.

No problem at all. Good to talk to you. Hope it was useful for you.
You take care. Bye.